This may be one of the most important videos
you'll ever see when it comes to understanding
health in the human body.
In some very simple terms,
with some surprising information,
Raymond Francis tells us how to recover our health.
How anybody can recover their health
regardless of your current condition.
He knows this because he once sat
at deaths certain door step.
Before he remembered something
from his chemistry studies at MIT.
A solution that costs pennies
and ultimately saved his life.
In your book, 'Never Be Sick Again",
you're saying that health is a choice,
and that means conversely,
to be ill is also a choice.
And that is not a choice we want to make.
How can we begin recovering ourselves,
a nation of chronically ill people?
Well I think first of all
we have to understand that health is a choice.
That most people in our society,
including myself, before I took ill
and almost died. (laughs)
Think of disease as something like a meteorite
that falls out of the sky,
hits you over the head, and bam,
you've got diabetes, you've got cancer,
you've got something else.
And I think that's the popular perception.
It isn't that way, of course.
Health is a choice.
And, as a society, and as individuals,
we have the ability to make choices
that can restore the health to ourselves,
as individuals, and to our people as a society.
But what we've done as a culture
is certainly in the west, the western world,
is we've turned over any of our innate knowledge
about our own bodies, and put it in the hands
of the medical profession,
where we no longer have faith in our own bodies,
we no longer have faith in our bodies ability to heal
itselves, or our own ability to make correct decisions.
And this can be,
we have been programmed
to not have faith in ourselves, have we not?
I think we have.
We've certainly given away our power
to the medical profession.
And they don't have a clue about
how to cure a disease.
I mean, that's obvious.
And if they did, we wouldn't have any disease.
And more than three out of four Americans
have a diagnosable chronic disease.
So that's a pretty sick population.
So we do have the ability.
And we need to understand this
and begin to accept this responsibility.
In fact, I even read an ancient Buddhist text.
It goes back thousands of years.
And it says that,
"Keeping yourself in good health is a duty."
Is a duty.
And it's no different today.
Health is not a, we think of it as a right,
you know, we need a right to health care.
It isn't, health is a responsibility,
and we need to teach this to our children,
we need to accept this responsibility,
for ourselves.
And the good news is that if you do this
you will feel so good,
and life will be so wonderful.
Most people don't even know
what it feels like to be healthy
because they've never been healthy
in their entire lifetime.
And they don't know the joy,
the boundless energy,
the mental acuity,
the confidence that you're not going to get sick.
For example, I flew back from Europe last fall
on the leg from Brussels to New York,
there was a seven hour leg.
I sat next to a man
who had one of the worst colds in the world.
He sneezed his way to New York,
(laughs)
blowing his nose.
He had a huge box of Kleenex on his tray table.
He sneezed, and blew his nose,
and he was like, anybody else,
I don't know how many people on that plane
came down with that cold after that
but I'm sure there was a lot.
I didn't.
Right.
But you
weren't always this way.
Right, I used to be like everybody else.
Let's talk about how you used to be
and what happened.
I ate a normal American diet.
And it was probably a better than average
normal American diet.
I certainly didn't abuse myself,
and certainly didn't abuse sugary things
and what have you.
But I ate, and lived a normal American lifestyle
thinking that disease is a spin of the roulette wheel.
And some people are gonna get sick
and some don't.
And then I took sick and I went to
36 top specialists.
When you say you took sick
what was wrong?
What were the symptoms, let's say?
Well, my first symptom was a lack of energy.
And of course, that's the number one complaint
made to doctors in America, lack of energy.
So I went to my doctor and I said,
"Doctor, I'm slowing down.
"I need to get on a plane in Boston and fly to Tokyo.
"Get off the plane and go into a business meeting,
"and function."
And I wasn't doing too well,
I was dragging my tail.
The doctor did thousands of dollars worth of testing.
And I came back for the next visit
and he sat behind his desk
and gleefully announced
that I was in perfect health.
(laughs)
And I said, "Doc, if I'm in perfect health
"how come I feel this way?"
And he said, "You're getting older."
And I said, "Doc, I've never felt this way before
"in my entire life."
And he said, "You've never been this old before."
And I was 46 years old.
(laughs)
(laughs) And I went away thinking
if this is what getting old's all about.
Time to go out to pasture.
I don't want to do this.
I mean, do other people feel this way?
Well, two more years passed,
I was really dragging my tail.
and I developed a lot of allergies
and I was very tired.
Needed lots of sleep.
I thought this time with all the allergies
I'll go to an allergist.
So I went to an allergist.
He gave me a diagnostic test.
I suffered a catastrophic reaction to the test.
Became totally disabled, and very ill.
For the next 10 months I went to 36
top specialists.
Not a one of them helped me.
And finally one of them said,
"Oh, I can help you take this drug."
(laughing)
I took the drug, the drug poisoned my liver
and my liver died.
And my death was a medical certainty from liver failure.
And at the last moment
I used my own knowledge of biochemistry
to save my life.
And then it took me two years,
two years to restore myself
to where I could go back to work again.
I was very, I was dead.
I was dead.
And two years of hard work,
went back to work.
It was never the same again.
I started, as a scientist.
And your background's from MIT.
You were graduated from MIT?
I'm graduate of MIT.
Yes, so.
Serious science.
Yeah, a chemist by training.
And a good scientist never stops asking
the question, Why?
So I kept asking, Why did I get sick?
You know, How do you get sick?
How do you take a healthy person
and make them a sick person?
And if you have a sick person,
how do you make them healthy again?
What do you have to do with the molecular level
of the cellular level.
And I started getting answers to these questions
and the answers were so profound,
that finally in 1991 I resigned from everything,
I was president of an international management
consulting firm.
I was even on the board of directors of a hospital.
I resigned from everything,
devoted the rest of my life
to improving the health of the American people.
And as I learned more and more and more,
and realized that health truly was a choice,
and that we already have the knowledge
to end this epidemic.
Here we have this unprecedented epidemic
of chronic and degenerative disease.
The cancer, the heart disease,
the diabetes, the osteoporosis,
the Alzheimers, all of,
asthma.
All these horrible chronic diseases.
The knowledge we already have
is sufficient to put an end to them tomorrow.
We don't need to do another dimes worth
of research, and I'm a scientist, I love research.
But, so I think we should do more research.
But if you ask this question,
Do we need to do more research
to end this epidemic of chronic disease?
The answer is no.
We already know how to stop heart disease,
cancer, diabetes.
All of these things can be stopped
dead in their tracks,
with what we already know.
So what happened to you?
Let's take that story forward then.
In the 11th hour, renal failure,
your death is a certainty,
and you suddenly took back your own
decision making powers about your own health.
Where did you begin,
and how did you begin rebuilding your own health?
And let's use that as the journey forward.
Well, on my deathbed,
where I really was at the point
where I could not even move,
I remember lying there.
I wanted to move my head.
So I told my head to move.
And it didn't.
And it wouldn't.
That's how far gone I was.
I could not move.
I would command my head to move,
it wouldn't move. (laughs)
And I remembered,
I knew I was dying of liver failure.
And I remembered from my biochemistry
that Vitamin C was a critical nutrient
in terms of liver detoxification.
And then I also I had read a book
and by a man who had
cured himself using Vitamin C.
So I thought to myself,
I wonder what would happen if I took some Vitamin C.
Were you lucid enough to be able
to articulate what you wanted to?
I was lucid enough, yes,
to articulate what I wanted.
And I got some Vitamin C.
I took only three or four grams
of Vitaminc C, which a doctor thinks is a lot.
Right.
But really isn't that much.
And it was enough to turn me around
within 24 hours my life signs stabilized.
And within 36 hours I could sit up in bed.
And that was the first improvement
I've had in 10 months.
Isn't that sad?
Four grams of Vitamin C, and you lived.
Right.
It's so sad.
And my doctor said that I was dead.
Yeah.
They said there
was nothing they could do.
They don't know how.
No.
And it's not
that they're bad people,
it's just that they've been inadequately trained
and they simply don't understand it.
They don't understand biochemistry.
And health is all about biochemistry.
And they don't understand it.
So, you were sitting up in bed
and now you're getting your energy and your mind back.
And, let's tell us what happens there,
how you recovered the rest of yourself.
What you discovered.
Well, what I discovered, and ultimately,
and what I've written about in my books,
especially in, "Never Be Sick Again",
which is,"Never Be Sick Again"
is a breakthrough revolutionary book.
There were doctors all over the world
that are reading "Never Be Sick Again"
and calling us and saying,
"I'm changing the way I practice medicine."
Excellent.
Doctors are
calling and saying, "I've practiced medicine for 30 years.
"I've read your book.
"I'm changing the way I practice medicine."
Because what I discovered is this,
on the bottom line, there's only one disease.
There are not thousands of diseases.
So what we're doing here is
I've constructed a model of health
that is so simple
that you can teach it to a child.
And so powerful,
that you can cure almost anything.
In fact, there are people that buy
"Never Be Sick Again"
with stage four terminal cancer,
go home, and cure their cancer.
That's amazing.
And this happens over, and over,
and over again.
Well, why can they do that?
Because there is no such thing as cancer.
You see, there's only one disease.
And that's a malfunctioning cell.
See, we're all made of little units of life
called cells.
And all of us started life
as a single cell in our mother.
If that cell was functioning the way it's supposed to,
you were healthy.
It's no different today.
Now that we're made of multi trillions of cells,
tens of trillions of cells,
if every cell in your body is functioning,
the way it's supposed to,
you can't be sick.
The only way you can be sick
is when the large number of cells
malfunction.
And then you'll start to notice symptoms.
At first you may have a few aches or pains.
Or you may feel less energetic.
With me, my energy levels were down.
Our doctors, unfortunately, don't know how
to measure health when it's in its initial decline.
Right.
And there's
a long space between the initial decline
and disease.
And so what I realized is that
as cells began to malfunction
more and more and more,
you will get sicker, and sicker, and sicker,
until finally you'd get a diagnosable disease.
Well, the bottom line is this,
cells malfunction for only two reasons.
Either, they're not getting everything that they need
to function properly,
or they're getting something that is interfering
with their normal function.
Ie: toxins.
Right.
So we call this the first problem,
deficiency.
And the second problem, toxicity.
And you can simplify it even further
for the average person, and say,
"Well, there's only one disease,
"a malfunctioning cell.
"And cells malfunction for only two reasons.
"Not enough, or too much."
(laughs)
Right.
So if they're not getting enough of what they need,
and they're getting too much of what they don't need,
you get disease.
So once I understood this I realized
that all of the things that I had wrong with me,
and I had four autoimmune diseases, by the way.
I had lupus,
I had Sjogren's syndrome,
I had Hashimoto's thyroiditis,
I had Fibromyalgia.
I had so many problems,
I had chemical sensitivities,
I was one of the most chemical sensitive
people in the world.
I had chronic fatigue syndrome.
I suffered from seizures.
I had so many problems
and I would go to top specialists.
My eyes were having problems
I'd go to eye doctors.
I went to so many top specialists,
when I finally realized, it was all the same thing.
Yeah.
It was
malfunction,
at the cellular level
caused by the cells not getting enough
of what they need,
and getting too much of what they don't need.
Well, once I understood this,
that is so powerful, that you can literally
eliminate almost any disease.
So, there's no such thing as a disease.
And we have to get away from
we give these symptoms names.
But it's wrong to give symptoms names.
Oh but that means
the drug companies can create a magic pill
if we give it a name.
Oh yes indeed, now the drug company
can create a magic pill, which unfortunately
just makes you sicker.
Right.
And doesn't help at all.
And it's crazy.
Where did we get the idea
that if somebody was sick
we could help them
by giving them poison?
Right.
I mean
hiragomy, you have a system here
that's only two causes of disease,
deficiency and toxicity.
Well, prescription drugs cause deficiencies.
And they're toxic.
Right.
So drugs cause disease. (laughs)
And the more drugs you take
the sicker you get.
Now unfortunately, we don't call it that.
So you start off with maybe one so-called disease,
you take drugs, you end up with like six
so-called diseases.
But when you go back, the doctor doesn't say,
"Oh my gosh, you started with one disease
"and now you have six."
He goes, "Oh, these are side effects."
Well, that sounds a lot better than a new disease.
Mm-hmm.
But that's actually
what it is, is a
whole new set of problems
caused by the deficiency and toxicity
that the drugs induce.
Right.
So not
a good way to go.
Powerful, simple system.
One disease, two causes of disease.
And what I began to realize
is that all I had to do to get well
was to give my cells what they needed.
So I vastly improved my diet,
found good supplements to take,
and to get rid of the toxins.
So I started identifying what in my life
gave me toxins.
And I found out, toothpaste, shampoo,
you know, common things that we're all exposed to
were highly toxic.
So I started using safe shampoos
and safe toothpaste.
And I started saunas, using saunas,
to get stored toxins out of the body,
and eventually I restored myself
to good function.
And now there, at age 48, I almost died.
I'm now going on 72.
I have boundless energy.
I never get sick.
I've had one cold in the last 21 years.
Amazing.
And I have
an excuse. (laughs)
I made a speech in Egypt
and I was flying back,
it was bad weather,
the planes got canceled, got delayed.
I was up for 48 hours without sleep.
Yeah.
I zonked
my immunity.
Sure.
I got a cold.
One cold in 21 years.
I've now got my arteries down
to my late 20s.
So here I am, I'm in my early 70s.
The biological age of my arteries
is in the late 20s.
And by the time I'm 80,
I want the biological age of my arteries
to be down into my late teens.
Well, anybody can do that.
So my probability, here I am, early 70s.
My probability of having a heart attack
or a stroke, is that of someone in their late 20s.
Anybody can do this.
You want to keep your biological age
substantially younger
than your chronological age.
And that way, you won't get sick,
you won't become disabled,
you won't end up in a nursing home,
you won't get diseased.
You'll live a long, happy, disease free life.
Well let's talk about some of the power
players.
This is very wonderful, empowering, and exciting.
Talk about some of the power players.
What, in your book you're very specific
about certain food groups that are packed
with nutrients that our bodies really need.
And you also look at the toxicity issue,
and also supplements.
So, let's start with foods and supplements.
What are some of the,
just a general, without giving us every,
all the information, we don't have enough time.
Right.
Well I think, you know, for the average person,
I mean, I can certainly, I go through all the foods
in my mind, and I understand
which is better than the other.
But, for average person,
don't eat processed foods.
Don't eat foods that come in boxes, and cans,
and jars, and which is what most people do.
90 cents out of the American food dollar
is spent on processed foods.
Well, processed foods are low in nutrition,
and high in toxins.
What are the two causes of disease?
Malnutrition, and toxicity.
So that's what processed foods cause disease.
So, when you go to the supermarket,
what you're buying is disease.
People have to understand that.
What is food?
Food is what nature provides.
An apple is, you know, pick it off the tree and eat it.
That's food.
So, eat as much as possible,
eat food as nature provides it.
And as much as possible,
eat a plant based diet,
as nature provides it.
And yeah, you can have some animal protein
in your diet, but not a lot.
And again, grass fed, organic, you want it.
Grass fed, organic.
Exactly, you want organic.
You don't want any animal protein
that is not organic, because otherwise it's loaded
with pesticides and all kinds of other toxins.
So you don't want that.
But grass fed organic beef is certainly
okay to eat in moderation.
And the same thing with eggs, and chicken.
What about raw organic
grass fed sourced milk?
Well I,
there's a lot of question about the milk.
And basically my philosophy is, avoid milk.
It is not something that nature intended us to eat.
And if you look at mother nature,
and I always go back to mother nature,
if you look at nature, you find that after weaning,
no animal drinks milk.
And in nature,
no animal drinks the milk of another species.
We violate both of those.
We drink the milk of another species
and we drink milk after weaning.
Milk is--
And for the
most part, it's highly processed.
And it's, exactly.
For the most part, highly processed.
Certainly less dangerous if it's not highly processed.
If it's raw.
But I don't recommend milk as a food at all.
Because mother nature doesn't recommend it.
And the milk of each species
is unique to that species, by the way.
So cross species feeding is not a good idea.
Uh huh.
And it is also unique to the needs of the infant
of the species.
For instance, it's very high in fat.
Well, you don't want an adult
to be getting lots of fat, say.
But you want the baby to be getting lots of fat.
So it's not a good food,
I don't recommend it at all.
Okay.
So let's go onto the things that you
do recommend, that you're really high on.
Applied to most human beings.
I eat a lot of salads.
And that's what I recommend.
In other words, plant based,
as nature provides it, unprocessed,
lots of vegetables.
Lots of fruits.
Some fresh whole grains.
Some good high quality fish.
Some organic meats,
and organic eggs, in moderation.
That makes up a good diet.
Get rid of the sugar.
In my book I talk about the big four.
Sugar, white flour,
processed oils,
dairy.
And excess animal protein.
These are the causes of most
of our diseases.
If we were to do just one thing,
outlaw sugar,
we would probably have an enormous impact
on the health of the population.
Absolutely.
Reducing
everything from colds, and flu,
to cancer and diabetes,
and heart disease.
Sugar is a deadly, deadly metabolic poison.
If it were a new product today
it would never be allowed on the market.
Because the FDA couldn't do it,
couldn't allow it on the market
because we know how dangerous it is.
So if you want to do just one thing in your life
get the sugar out of your life.
Or at least substantially reduce it.
And don't feed it to children.
Now what happens if for people,
because we have been raised to have an incredible
sweet tooth.
And not just in the west, I mean globally.
Not so much in certain Asian countries,
but other than that, seeing sweets appear everywhere.
But usually it's in a more natural form,
if we're looking more indigenously.
How do you feel about things like
raw unprocessed honey
or raw agave nectar?
I think in moderation
both of those would be okay.
But again, in moderation.
In moderation.
But get rid of the deadly white stuff.
Get rid of the deadly white stuff, exactly.
Even in the bible it cautions against
eating too much honey.
Yes.
So.
Honey is fine.
Because it does create
an insulin response, which starts a lot
of these chains of reactions.
Exactly.
In fact there are some researchers
who believe if there's a single key to disease,
that single key would be insulin.
Yes.
And when you
eat white flour, when you eat sugar,
your insulin level goes up
and then that just blows all of your bodies chemistry.
If you eat two teaspoons of sugar
and you body chemistry will be in chaos,
for about six to eight hours.
So if you eat sugar in the morning, for breakfast,
and then some at lunch, and then some at dinner,
your body chemistry will be in chaos
24 hours a day, seven days a week.
How can you expect to be healthy?
Very true.
Let's talk about complex carbohydrates
rather than simple carbohydrates.
One of the new trends is sprouted grain
organic breads, for example.
Yes.
How are those,
how does that figure in?
Because it's a phenomena that's really
only been made available, say, the last
four or five years, for the most part.
Exactly, and I think they're all right.
Again, in moderation.
One can make an argument
that grains should not be a part
of the human diet.
And in fact, they were not.
Up until about 10,000 years ago.
And then at that point
health began to deteriorate,
and it's still deteriorating.
So, and if you look at the chemistry,
one can make an argument
that grains should not be
part of the human diet.
Well today, if we took grains out of the
human diet, everybody would starve to death
because it's the biggest,
the number one food in the world is grains.
Right, right.
So we're kind of stuck with them.
And I think it's okay.
But again, eat them in moderation.
And I do.
I eat grains, but I eat them in moderation,
probably two or three times a week.
At a particular meal.
So, some brown rice,
or some quinoa,
or some amaranth,
or millets, or things like that.
Pretty much stay away from the gluten grains,
the rye,
the barley,
the wheat.
Stay away from the gluten containing grains,
because about half the population now
is allergic to gluten.
They're sensitive to gluten.
And they don't know it.
Many of them don't know it.
And they've all kinds of diseases
and they don't know it's gluten.
Let's talk about gluten alone.
Because again, this is talking about the,
too much of.
Right.
So we're having the toxicity error,
an allergic reaction to gluten.
What is the array of symptoms that you might see
for people who are gluten intolerant, and don't know it.
Okay, well if you're gluten intolerant
and you don't know it,
the symptoms can be anything.
Okay.
Anything.
Anything from fatigue?
Fatigue.
Bloating,
headaches, aches, pains
Headaches.
Bloating.
I had one woman that came to me,
she had lived,
her life was a living hell.
From the age of 18
to the age of 48,
30 years,
she had untreatable depression.
She went to the Mayo Clinic.
She went to every conceivable doctor and clinic.
She took every conceivable antidepressant drug.
She had untreatable depression.
She was often suicidal.
Often could not get out of bed, she was so depressed.
Her husband divorced her.
Life was a living hell for 30 years.
She came to me and I said,
"Well,
"nothing seems to have helped.
"Why don't you try getting off of gluten?"
She got off of the gluten
and she was the happiest woman in the world.
Amazing.
In 48 hours
she was cured of 30 years
of a living hell, in 48 hours,
simply by getting off of gluten.
So she had a cerebral allergy to gluten
and that's what was causing her depression.
And that's not uncommon, is it?
No, it is not uncommon.
Gluten can cause virtually any symptom.
That's it, okay.
Let's talk about some of the super nutrients,
such as supplementation, that we can do.
You talked about the example of
three to four grams of Vitamin C,
and you basically turned your life force around.
Right, well supplementation today
is an absolute necessity.
And that's just not me saying this,
a few years ago the National Academy of Sciences
came out and issued a report, and they said that,
"Even if you eat a good diet,
"it is no longer possible
"to get the nutrition that you need
"without supplementing."
And this is from the National Academy of Sciences.
So it's not just me saying this.
Right.
But I found
the same thing in my own studies.
The nutrition content of the food
has dropped dramatically.
For instance, go to the store,
buy a carrot.
The carrot you buy today,
you've got to eat four of them,
four of them, to get the same magnesium
you got out of one carrot
50 years ago.
Yeah.
You've got to
eat between 10 and 20 carrots
to get the same zinc
you got out of one carrot
50 years ago.
You've got to eat five apples
to get the same nutrition
you got out of one apple
50 years ago.
So.
But are you
talking about produce that's mass produced
to agri-business as we know it today?
Not necessarily from a backyard
organic well kept garden?
Is there a difference?
An organic, yes,
there would be a difference.
Yes.
The organic
backyard garden is going to give you
a higher level of nutrition.
And in fact what they found is
is when you take normal farm
and convert it to an organic farm,
there was one experiment they did
with 10 years.
And they grew tomatoes.
And with each passing year
the nutritional content of the tomatoes increased.
So this is a good case
for buying locally, buying organically.
Absolutely.
And even
creating your own little garden.
Absolutely.
More and more people
are doing their own little garden.
And it's amazing what you can get out of
a little garden.
Yes it is.
A little garden.
We do it bio organically,
just you have to jump out of the way
this stuff grows so fast.
Right.
So there's the problem.
The nutritional content of the food
the soils are so depleted.
Now the mineral are depleted.
And Linus Polly once said,
"You could trace every disease
"to a mineral deficiency."
Yes.
So
we need to do something.
And what we need to do is supplement.
And that's what the National Academy of Sciences said.
And a few years ago, even
the Journal of the American Medical Association
came out and said,
"Everybody needs to take vitamins."
I never thought I'd live long enough to see that.
(laughs)
Yeah.
(laughing)
In the
Journal of the American Medical Association.
But they did.
They came out and they said it.
So, but we need a supplement.
But that's a whole other challenge.
Because most of the supplements on the market
are not something that I would take, or recommend.
What about whole food
source vitamins.
Is that a?
It sounds
like a good idea,
but in execution it's not.
Okay, let's talk about why,
and what is.
How you can find your way to really
proper nutrients.
Supplements.
It's difficult, and in fact,
as a chemist I've been studying this now
for 20 years.
And really, there's about,
oh about four dozen people in the whole country
that really know how to put a vitamin pill together
and make it work.
Who are they?
Ummm.
(laughs)
Well, I'm one of them.
Yes, okay.
I'm one of them.
(laughs)
And I've been working hard
to achieve that level of knowledge and competence.
But I now have it, and I actually even make my own vitamins,
at this point.
But I wrote a report on this.
And it's available to anyone, free of charge.
All they have to do is go to my website
and the website is beyondhealth.com,
that's two words stuck together,
beyond, and health, beyondhealth.com.
Right.
And right
on the front page of beyondhealth.com
is a little button that says Free reports.
Okay.
One of those reports is called
"The Road Map to Choosing Supplements."
It is worth reading.
Because if you go to a store
to buy supplements,
it is bewildering.
I mean, I walk into a vitamin store
and you look at all those brands
and it's bewildering.
You need a road map
to find your way through that.
And that's what this is.
"The Road Map to Choosing Supplements."
Available free of charge
at beyondhealth.com.
And you said there are
about four companies that are producing
absorbable quality supplements.
About that, yeah.
Very, very few.
It varies all over the map,
from things that have absolutely
no nutritional value whatsoever,
to things that maybe are 10% or 25%
bio available.
But when you get up into where I'm at,
at like 95% bio available,
that's rarefied atmosphere.
What is the difference?
What makes it bio available?
I mean, without going into the chemistry of it,
what's the difference between that type of supplement
and others?
Well first of all, the form that the vitamin is in.
Is very important.
The purity of the vitamin is very important.
And how it's compounded
and mixed with other things.
And any fillers that are put in there,
that can reduce the bio availability.
But I'll give you a very specific example.
Go to the store, pick up a multivitamin.
The Vitamin B12, in about 90%,
more than 90% of all the supplements you pick up,
will be in the form called cyanocobalamin.
Right.
Cyanacobalamin
has very poor bio availability.
Very poor bio availability.
But also, it breaks down in the body
and puts cyanide into the body.
Not good.
Cyanide.
Yeah, not good.
So then better brands will say,
Well we know cyanocobalamin is not good,
so we'll use the more expensive
methylcobalamin.
Well, methylcobalamin is good,
but the problem is the body carefully regulates
the amount of methylcobalamin in the blood,
so if you take some,
and then you get too much in the blood,
it very quickly gets rid of it.
So the half life of methylcobalamin
in the blood is about five minutes.
So if you want a few minutes worth of B12.
Right, not adequate.
So what is your source?
I use a source called hydroxocobalamin.
Which is the perfect solution.
It is very pure,
it works very well,
it's highly bio available.
The half life is in hours,
not in minutes.
So why doesn't everybody use it?
It costs more than $3000 a pound.
Ah, that's why, yes I understand.
That's why they don't do it.
Yeah.
So
that's bio availability.
But you take something as mundane as
Vitamin C.
Almost all of the Vitamin C on the market
is junk.
I wouldn't take it.
I don't recommend it to everybody.
Almost all the Vitamin C on the market
today comes out of China.
They're not making it correctly.
And I'll give you a specific example.
When you sythesize Vitamin C
you get two molecules.
One of them is called D-ascorbate.
The other is called L-ascorbate.
They're both exactly the same molecule.
The only thing different about them
is their shape.
And it's just like,
here's a perfect example.
I've got two hands,
they're both exactly the same.
But they're both fundamentally different.
Because this is the left hand
this is the right hand.
So they're both the same
but they're both fundamentally different.
That's the same as the D-ascorbate
and the L-ascorbate.
It's the L-ascorbate molecule
that is the biologically active molecule.
The D-ascorbate is not.
And the D-ascorbate is actually
an irritant to the body.
It can irritate your stomach,
irritate your gut.
It can actually interfere with
the metabolism of the L-ascorbate.
So when you buy 1000 milligrams
of Vitamin C, you're only getting
500 milligrams of the biologically active molecule.
Mm-hmm.
And you
don't want that.
You want a Vitamin C that's 100%
L-ascorbate.
Mm-hmm.
100% the active biologically active molecule.
Then it goes downhill from there.
Because unless you're really careful,
about how you make the Vitamin C,
and you allow oxygen into the system,
the oxygen oxidizes the Vitamin C
and then you get oxidized Vitamin C.
And oxidized Vitamin C is a free radical.
Mm-hmm.
And free
radicals are not good.
And so many,
I've seen Vitamin C formulations out there
that are as high as 25% oxidized Vitamin C.
Highly advertised brands,
10% oxidized Vitamin C.
You want a Vitamin C that has no
oxidized Vitamin C.
Yes.
And then
almost all the Vitamin C is made from corn.
If you are sensitive to corn,
and I'd say at least half the population today
is sensitive to corn,
you'll get an allergic reaction
when you take that Vitamin C.
Even though you don't realize it.
So.
I'm getting
the idea why you're saying it's important
for people to read this report on your site.
Extremely important, yes,
because you need to know.
These are subtle things,
and this is just the tip of the iceberg,
by the way, that the chemistry
gets much more complex than this.
But I make my own Vitamin C now,
and it's as 100% L-ascorbate,
completely corn free,
and completely free of any oxidized Vitamin C.
And that's what you want to be taking.
Excellent, yes.
And it's so pure
I give it to people who are
chemically sensitive,
and I used to be chemically sensitive,
and they come back and say,
"This is the only Vitamin C
"I have ever been able to take
"because it's so pure."
That is fabulous.
I mean, that you, A, you have the where with all
to do it, with your background in biochemistry,
thank God, that you're motivated to do this.
Because I think all too often
this is a venture,
it's a corporate venture,
to offer something to the public
without any genuine understanding.
Yes.
How could
it have gotten this way?
How could it have become like this
where there's so little oversight
as to the quality?
There is some oversight as to the quality,
as to what goes in.
But there's no oversight as to
how active those substances are.
Right.
And unfortunately, it's got that way.
And manufacturers,
I've been a consultant to vitamin companies.
So I know how think,
and I know that they do.
And a lot of them just say,
"Well let's make some vitamins."
And they go to a compounder and they say,
"Will you make us a formula?"
And the compounder says,
"Yeah, I've got a formula."
I give it this and this and this,
and I tweak it a little bit,
make it a little bit different,
and then that's your unique formula.
Your label.
And that's
how they do it.
So it's just a new label,
but actually there's no science behind it.
And unfortunately, that's what they do.
And even when there is science behind it.
For instance, I was consulting for a company
that had iron in their multivitamin.
And I explained to them that you can't do that.
Because if you put iron into the multivitamin
it can actually cause a reaction
in the pill, in the product,
that will damage the Vitamin C,
and the Vitamin E, so
it can damage the antioxidants
while it's in the pill.
So here you are, you want to get Vitamin C,
but it's all been damaged because
there's iron in the multivitamins.
So I told them, "You really have to
"get the iron out of the multivitamin."
And their technical people understood that,
but the marketing people came back and said,
"No way are we going to take
"the iron out of our multivitamin
"because people want to see iron in the formula."
Mm-hmm.
"And we're afraid if we take it out
"people won't buy the product."
So the iron stayed in
even though it was ruining the product.
(laughing)
That's the level of mentality.
Well in general, it's just a very
complex business to extract solo nutrients
out of things we used to get from our produce.
Yes.
And so
but here we are, we're kind of stuck with it now
because of the lack of nutrient in the food supply.
So we will encourage everybody to read that report
and start.
Is it affordable for people?
I mean, this is a real question,
you're talking about better science, it sounds like,
in terms of, not just the intellectual knowledge
you're bringing to it, but the actual sources themselves
sound like they're a little more costly.
Well, they are a little more costly,
but actually when you look at it,
and analyze what you get for what you pay,
they're the least expensive vitamins on the market.
Fabulous.
Yes.
And that's--
Available on your website, as well?
Yeah, available on beyondhealth.com.
The least bit, if you take,
if you spend a dollar to buy a vitamin,
and you're only getting 10% of that,
you're getting 10 cents worth of value.
When you buy something that really works
and you spend a dollar,
you're getting a dollars worth of value,
that's a better deal.
Absolutely.
Well let's talk about the detoxification part of this.
Now we've talked about the supplementation
food sources a bit, and we encouraged people
to study up on that a little bit more
through your report.
But what about ridding the body
of things that are essentially
blocking our paths to health?
The toxins.
Well the toxins have become extremely important.
Because the average American today
is in toxic overload.
I mean, this is a real crisis.
And this load increases every year.
Because they're storing in our tissues.
So there are three things you have to do.
Number one,
stop putting the toxins in.
Well, we live in a toxic world.
We are in toxic overload.
That's the bad news.
Mm-hmm.
Here's the good news.
80% of our toxic load
is under our personal control.
Very good.
So we can cut 80% of our toxic load out,
if we just pay attention to it.
And I mentioned before,
personal care products, like
toothpaste, and shampoo.
Toothpaste is a deadly poison.
Buy a tube,
go look at a tube of toothpaste,
look at what it says on the box,
it says if you swallow any of this, you know,
call the poison control center. (laughs)
Exactly. (laughs)
Get an ambulance.
Rush to the hospital.
You know, don't swallow this product.
One tube of toothpaste
is sufficient to kill a small child.
So why do you want to use that every day.
There are chemicals in there that go
right through the mucous membranes
of the mouth.
The mucous membrane are very porous.
Very permeable.
And it goes right through,
it gets into the bloodstream,
bio-accumulates in your tissues
year after year after year.
Well, how much of this gunk
can you put into yourselves
year after year after
before the poor cell croaks?
And that's what's happening.
People are getting sick,
and they never say,
"Well gosh, I'm sorry,
"I brush my teeth with X brand of toothpaste."
Yeah.
Well there
are safe brands of toothpaste.
Yes.
And the
same thing with shampoo.
When you say safe brands,
I mean, some of them I've used over the years
are basically baking soda based, right?
Mm-hmm.
I've kind of
settled on Dr. Bronner's Peppermint Soap.
Is that reasonable enough?
Clean enough?
Yes, sure.
Yeah?
Absolutely.
I mean, you get used to the
soapy taste after a little bit,
but your teeth feel squeaky clean.
So there's some very inexpensive simple
fixes to this.
Very inexpensive.
And simple, yeah.
That anybody can do just learning
where the toxins are.
Here we are, we're sitting in a room
with a carpet.
Mm- hmm.
Well, it's an older carpet.
So it isn't off gassing as much as.
But new carpets, new carpets.
If you take a piece of new carpet,
and put it in a chamber
and put some mice in the chamber,
they'll be dead the next day.
That's how toxic this stuff is.
And people are breathing it.
Their children are breathing it.
Their pets are breathing it.
Kids are rolling around on it
and playing on it.
Exactly,
and highly toxic.
So learn about where the toxins
are coming from
and simply get them out of your life.
And your book talks about this.
We have a whole chapter.
Yeah, it's in depth.
On toxins.
Yes.
In "Never Be Sick Again."
So simple to do.
The next part, the next step,
one is, stop putting toxins in.
And that's sensible, stop putting them in.
(laughing)
Yes.
If you want to detoxify
stop putting them in.
And the next thing is,
help your body's detoxfication system.
Because if you supply a molecule of a toxin
to the liver, it requires many molecules
to detoxify that one molecule.
Yeah.
Well, where
do those mini molecules come from?
They come from your diet.
So, you have to eat a good diet,
you have to get on a good supplement program,
and that will give your body's detoxification
mechanisms the means to work properly.
What about water intake?
The fluid part of it?
Water is very important.
There's certainly controversy about how much
is necessary.
Where are you settled at
on that issue?
Well I think it depends on the individual
and their lifestyle, and where they live.
I mean, if you live in Phoenix, Arizona,
you need to drink more water than you do
if you live in Boston, because you're gonna
be losing more.
So it's hard to say.
A lot of people go overboard
and end up drinking, I think, too much water.
But many of us drink too little.
So I try to, you know,
when I get up in the morning,
I make a big glass of Vitamin C.
So first thing in the morning
I have a big glass of water.
And I do that before I go to bed again.
I have another big glass.
So, and I try to do that during the day.
So if you do this faithfully
you'll probably get the water that you need.
And if you're losing a lot of water,
for instance, on a really hot day.
Mm-hmm.
I'll get thirsty.
Because I'm losing a lot of water,
and my body's control mechanism says,
Oh, you need more fluid.
So I drink more.
But I don't go overboard on that.
Okay.
Yeah.
Now you wrote another book
called "Never be Fat Again."
And a lot of the same principles apply.
Yes.
If you're
going for perfect health
and ridding your body of toxins,
this is automatically going to have an effect
on ones weight.
Absolutely.
Absolutely, automatically.
So this
is a double bonus here.
Absolutely double bonus.
People get on a good diet
and you'll lose weight.
Well, what causes the weight?
Sugar and white flour
are two of the big causes of overweight.
So you get the sugar
and the white flour out of your life
and you're going to be losing weight.
Yeah.
But in
"Never Be Fat Again"
one of the things that I discovered, in my research,
is the effect of toxins, on overweight.
Mm-hmm.
And this
you don't see that in your popular diet books.
Right.
They don't
talk about this.
But toxicity is one of the leading
causes of overweight.
And there's whole classes of toxins.
Artificial sweeteners,
artificial flavor enhancers,
some prescription drugs,
pesticides,
whole classes of toxins
that will make you pack on the pounds
because they jam the body's two control mechanisms.
The appetite control,
and the fat storage control.
Now those are what keep
your body in good shape.
So if you jam both of those in the on position
you're always going to be hungry.
And, your body will always store fat
no matter how little you eat.
So it really wrecks
your metabolism.
It wrecks your metabolism,
exactly, yeah.
So we're going to encourage people
to also check into that book,
so you can look at the complexities.
If you're overweight, and not just feeling ill,
but overweight as well, then this
gives another layer of information.
If you're more than five pounds overweight
you really should read "Never Be Fat Again"
as well.
Yeah.
Because overweight is a disease,
it is a very serious chronic disease.
And a very large portion of our population
and of many other western countries.
Australia, England, are both finding
huge rises in obesity, as well.
Yes.
So it's not
just an American problem.
It's global.
Yes.
Well, we've exported our diet. (laughs)
Exactly.
It's even starting in Asia now.
Yes.
Because
of western food influences.
Yes yes.
It's sad.
China, the latest report from China.
25% of the population is now overweight.
Yeah.
Here in America it's more than two thirds.
Yes.
And going
up to 70%.
So they've got a long way to catch up with us.
But maybe they'll catch up if they keep trying.
So let's encourage people to,
let's encourage people to check this information out,
as well.
And then before we wrap it up
I just have one quick question.
We have a rapid rise,
and this is not, this is global, as well,
in childhood diabetes.
Yes.
What's going
on there?
And what can we do?
I mean, I assume what we have to do
is similar to what you would do for anything else,
but what's causing this?
Well, first and foremost,
the diet of the mother.
Mothers are eating diets
that are inadequate in nutrition.
And high in toxins.
And the toxins are actually affecting the fetus
and programming genes in the fetus
and programming the brain in the fetus,
to do things.
So, for instance,
glutamate's a whole class
of flavor enhancers
that are in 80% of all processed foods.
Yes.
Contain glutamates.
Glutamates, if the mother is eating a lot
of glutamates, it can actually affect the genes
and the brain of the child,
so that the child is programmed
to be overweight for the rest of their life.
And that's one reason why you're seeing childhood obesity.
And the same thing happens for the childhood diabetes.
What can we do though?
Once this happens and they've been diagnosed,
what can they do?
Well, once the child is born,
what could you do?
Well, do what we tell you in 'Never Be Sick Again."
Eat a good diet, get on good supplement program,
avoid toxins, and you'll make the best of a bad situation.
Any particular supplements that work well
in this situation?
Chromium, or I don't know.
Is it there anything?
Well I don't think that people should go off
and just do one thing at a time.
We have multiple vitamins, multis,
that are scientifically designed to be synergistic.
Okay.
So all the things in there are synergistic.
And that's what you want.
Nutrients act as a team.
And I see some people taking large amounts
of one nutrient all by itself,
and that can really upset a lot of other chemistry.
Yeah.
So there's
a lot of chemistry to this
and people shouldn't be self-medicating.
And I actually put together what I call kits.
It's a group of supplements
that are scientifically designed
to do certain things.
We actually have a diabetes kit.
We might as well take advantage
of your 20 years of research
rather than trying to put it together ourselves.
Right? (laughs)
Yes yes yes, absolutey.
Why not, absolutely.
Well, anything before we wrap up here?
Any final messages that you
haven't been able to convey
in this interview yet?
Well, I think the final message is this.
That, no matter what you have,
no matter what disease you have,
you can make it better.
Maybe you can't cure it completely,
but you can make it better.
And you have the power to do that.
And I've seen people with Multiple Sclerosis,
ALS, you know, Lou Gehrig's disease,
all improve their situations vastly.
People with cancer, completely cured.
So health is a choice.
You can choose it.
But you have to learn how to do it.
And read my books and you'll.
They're excellent guides to this.
I have read.
And just put it to use.
And the power is there
I mean, it's just so wonderful.
I wish I could shout this from the rooftops.
You don't have to be sick.
For more information you can pick up
a copy of his book "Never Be Sick Again"
from his site at beyondhealth.com.
Some of the products he spoke about
are also available on the site,
including the high absorbency Vitamin C.
Until next time, thanks for watching CMN.